#© DRAFT
---
_[Note: This started off as an essay about selecting a license for Field Guide, but turned into a draft of what an intellectual property licensing policy - that institutionalized our model of collaborative research - would look like. I’d like to the consent of the other FRMlab members to implement this with our current membership. Then we invite other school groups (Bridge, Datalab) to adopt it, to ensure the work created at the school is free to use by anyone.]_

To read the papers cited in this essay, one has to pay publishing gatekeepers like Reed Elsevier or LexiNexis. Students of the University of Waterloo can access this content, it is built into our tuition, but a child in the Global South has little to no chance of accessing this content. This should be an uncomfortable thought: information is allocated according to privilege.
 
This essay serves as a provocation; an attempt to sketch out FRMlab's intrinsic political agenda in regards to authoring, appropriating and sharing information and creative content. It is our view that it is F_RMlab's responsibility - as the only student society dedicated to digital design - to critique and hold accountable aspects of the university's Intellectual Property (IP) policies that entrench injustice, to create and embed legal and technical infrastructures within the school to promote universal access to information, and finally, to look for ways to support and, if necessary, engage civil disobedience when our ethical duty conflicts with existing copyright schemes.
 
The Secretariat and Office of General Counsel lists the policies, procedures and guidelines that define the IP rights provided to members of the University of Waterloo. In general, Policy 73 guarantees (except in certain well-defined situations) ownership of IP rights with the content creator (cite) and thus the university takes no a priori share of revenue, ownership, copyright or other obligations for IP rights (cite). This system places the onus on students to affirm common usage licensing, which traditionally is not opted in by students. Consequently the work that is being created by students at the school of architecture everyday - mapping data, survey information, constructing 3D models of the city - by default cannot be reproduced, distributed or used to create derivative works because of the default copyright scheme.
 
An ongoing, collaborative organization like FRMlab cannot exist under such an IP system. Our workshops, our research and the digital tools we create gains value primarily through its reproduction, appropriation and dissemination by our a members and the global digital design community. Therefore, FRMlab's success hinges on guaranteeing others can safely use our collective work. An IP system for F_RMlab thus requires balancing the rights and legal protection of our content creators, while encouraging our work to be shared in the public sphere. Ongoing, research collaboration at the university is defined under Policy 73's default copyright scheme (cite), unless those members willingly, through informed consent, entered into an acceptable agreement with different provisions (cite). We chose to exercise this option and actively define a legal and technical infrastructure that safeguards and formalizes the group's participatory spirit.
 
FRMlab membership will entail by default, an agreement to share all work produced within the group through common usage licenses. Works of art, reports or videos will be licensed under the most recent version of the Creative Commons Attribution license (CC BY) (cite) and software will be licensed by the LGPL license from the Free Software Foundation (cite). Members have the option of selecting an alternative licensing scheme that guarantees further rights - FRMlab will provide a list of approved open source licenses available form the Open Source License - or even choose to opt out and reserve all rights to their works. But that will not be the default option. The agreement document is modified from the 'model intellectual property licensing policy for foundations' (cite) from the Creative Commons and in keeping with their practise, the agreement is dedicated to the public domain. F_RMlab will host on its Github account, where anyone can freely copy and modify it without attribution. We invite other student societies in the UWSA to adopt this agreement for work produced.
 
We would like to go further, because at best this covers new work created, but does not liberate existing datasets like GIS information that are locked in our university or government servers. For example, at the time of this writing, property data CAD for the city of Toronto costs $92,100.00 (cite) and releasing it into the public domain would conflict with its existing copyright protections. This is a contradiction of civic values - it is a absurd that sharing information on our city is illegal. There is no justice in following unjust laws - F_RMlab will continue to find ways of sharing data as our ethical duty compels us.
 
[ADD CONCLUSION ---- 
 or also a steward of the broader participatory culture that the licenses are meant to promote. Our social tools remove older obstacles to public expression, and thus remove the bottlenecks that characterized mass media. The result is the mass amateurization of efforts previously reserved for media professionals. Combined with the lowering of transaction costs associated with creating content --- ]
 
Saeran Vasanthakumar
April 7, 2014
